# Internationalisation

We're using the standard way of internationalising our app, as desbribed in the
[official documentation](https://docs.flutter.dev/ui/accessibility-and-internationalization/internationalization#setting-up).

What is specific to this project is the way we produce the template `lib/l10n/app_en.arb` file.

This file is generated by a script: `scripts/update-arb-from-crowdin.mjs` that fetches lichess translations from the [crowdin lichess project](https://crowdin.com/project/lichess).

## How to update the translations

There is a script that fetches the translations from crowdin and updates the `lib/l10n/app_en.arb` file.

This file must not be edited manually, as it will be overwritten by the script.

To update the translations, run the following commands:

```bash
./scripts/update-arb-from-crowdin.mjs
flutter gen-l10n
```

If the script does nothing (no changes), it means that the translations from the
last crowdin export are already up to date.

## How to add a new module from lila

Translations in
[lila](https://github.com/lichess-org/lila/tree/master/translation/source) are organised by module.

The list of modules we're using in the app is defined in the `scripts/update-arb-from-crowdin.mjs` script.

If you need to add a new module, you need to add it to the list of modules in the script.

Note that a module can contain a lot of translations that we don't need in the app. In this case, you can filter the translations by adding the module to the `whitelist` defined in the script.

Once you've added the module to the script, you can run the script to update the translations.

```bash
./scripts/update-arb-from-crowdin.mjs
flutter gen-l10n
```

You should see the new strings in the `lib/l10n/lila_*.arb` and `lib/l10n/lila_*.dart` files.

## Adding mobile-specific translations

> **Note**
>
> When working on a new feature, you should start with hardcoding English texts first. Once the feature is done,
> released and even used for a while, we can add translations, in order to avoid useless translating work.

There are some strings that appear only in this app, but not on lichess.org.

If you have a new string to be translated, add it to `translations/source.mobile.xml`. Make sure to include a `comment`
attribute, describing the usage of the string and its contents (e.g. placeholders). Some strings also must not exceed a
certain width due to UI constraints, use the `maxLength` attribute for that.

After updating translations as
described above, they can be used like the other translations, however a `mobile` prefix is added in dart. For example,
"foo" in `mobile.xml` turns into `mobileFoo` in dart.

> **Note**
>
> We do not translate error messages that are not critically important, such as "could not load XY" when screen "XY"
> failed to load. Translating work is done by a team of volunteers and we try to focus on quality rather than quantity.
> Such messages are mostly edge cases in the sense they should be rarely seen and people would understand that something
> went wrong and could not load without understanding the actual meaning of the error message.

> **Note**
> Do not translate names such as "Puzzle Storm" and "Puzzle Streak". If such names appear in a translation string,
> add a comment that they should not be translated.

